Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson.
And Daryl Lane.
The spring and summer of 1982 was a bonanza for science fiction fans.
Never have there been so many good science fiction and fantasy movies.
It began in the spring with some lightweights like the cat people, the road warriors, and the sword and the sorcerer.
But then some real blockbusters began appearing in the theaters and creating long lines of moviegoers.
These heavyweights would include Conan, the Dean of the Dalarantus production of Robert E. Howard's Barbarian Hero.
And then two from Steven Spielberg, the horror fantasy film Poltergeist and the incredibly popular E.T.
Then there was Star Trek II, The Wrath of Khan, a solid production that captured the essence of the television series.
Ridley Scott's Blade Runner was released in mid-summer, around the same time that John Carpenter's science fiction horror film, The Thing, came out.
And Tron, Walt Disney's landmark computer-animated spectacle brought millions to the theaters.
The science fiction radio show spoke recently with a nationally known movie critic, Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun Times, about science fiction in the cinema.
For a number of years, Ebert and his partner Gene Siskel have done a 30-minute television show, Sneak Previews, for PBS.
This year, however, they produced a one-hour show for commercial television that's doing quite well. It's called at the movies.
We asked Ebert if there is any reason for the great popularity of science fiction movies and the large number of them during the summer of 1982.
Yeah, I think that one reason is that science fiction movies are finally getting the special effects that are equal to their content.
When you would read a science fiction book, you would be able to imagine astonishing things happening.
But then when you would go to the movie, especially, let's say, in the 1950s, when there was the last big science fiction boom,
you would see some pretty transparently awful special effects in most of the movies.
And there were some good ones, some of George Powell's productions, for example, but for the most part, the special effects were laughable.
And so the movies were not able to do justice to the ideas in the material.
These new science fiction films, starting with, well, obviously starting with 2001 and then with Silent Running,
which were precursors of the current boom and which for a long time were not followed by any other science, by any other notable science fiction films,
these new films are able to harness enough technology so that the visuals can do justice to the ideas.
In some ways, the recent boom in science fiction and fantasy films makes it difficult to judge which ones are the best.
Right. In a way, the movie fan is like a child on Christmas morning with a large number of presents around him.
It's too much too fast and he doesn't know which toy to turn to.
It will take a while to gain perspective on the summer of 1982, but we asked Ebert about the future of science fiction in the movies.
Will the popularity of science fiction drop off, as it did after the science fiction movie boom of the 1950s?
This is a different kind of boom than the 50s boom.
For the most part, with the exception of movies like Fantastic Planet and Destination Moon, the 50s science fiction boom was a B movie boom.
Most of those pictures were made for double features or for drive-ins.
A lot of them were made by American International on a very low budget.
They were exploitation pictures.
The movies that are being made today are among the all-time top-grossing films ever made, indicating a really deep-seated desire on the part of the audience to go see them.
Another difference is that in the 50s, to a degree, even though television was around in the 50s,
the American people were still going to movies out of habits that they brought over from the pre-television era.
Today, the basic moviegoer is 19 years old, and more than half of all moviegoers are under the age of 25.
So you have different demographics in the audience, and these younger people have traditionally been more interested in science fiction.
So that I think that the big budget science fiction blockbuster is going to continue to be a phenomenon indefinitely.
We'll continue our conversation with film critic Roger Ebert next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Carson.
We're talking with Roger Ebert, the film critic of the Chicago Sun-Times and co-host of the television show at the movies.
Ebert's criticism demonstrates a real knowledge of science fiction, and he communicates a genuine appreciation of the field on his television show.
In fact, we suspect that he might have been a science fiction fan, so we asked him if he grew up reading science fiction.
Yeah, I got some old copies of Astounding and F&SF and Galaxy from a couple of college students who are on my paper route.
They gave me about 900 old magazines, which I still have, so I have volume one number one of a lot of different, you know, in the first year of F&SF and so forth.
So I started reading in, probably in fifth grade, and through high school I contributed to fanzines and I even published a few issues of my own fanzine.
I went to, I think, one science fiction convention, met Tarlan Ellison and Buck and Juanita Coulson.
The summer of 1982 witnessed the greatest explosion of good science fiction movies ever, with huge money makers like ET, Poltergeist, Star Trek II and Tron.
And ET is on its way to being the greatest money maker in Hollywood history. We asked Ebert if the movie is as good as the money it's taken in indicates.
The money that ET has taken in indicates the nature of the market today.
It was a mass market, very popular family entertainment that came out at summertime with more than a thousand theaters at some point playing the film.
And so it can generate revenues like that because of the nature of the market.
Movie is very good and I loved it. And I think it belongs on the same list though, not so much with science fiction movies as with movies like National Velvet, Lassie Come Home.
Movies about, as many other people have also observed, it's kind of a movie about a boy and his dog in a way.
It's more of that than science fiction. I mean technically, of course it's science fiction, but I think the appeal was not because it was science fiction.
The appeal was because of identification with this little boy and something that he learns to care for and something that we learn to care for.
The director of ET, Steven Spielberg, had another smash hit during the summer of 1982, Poltergeist.
Poltergeist is really a horror movie, a thriller with some tense and frightening scenes in it. But the fright doesn't stick with you when you leave the theater. You feel good somehow, even uplifted.
Ebert speculates on what Spielberg's got that has captured people's imagination.
Spielberg has the ability to remember what it was like to be a child.
When I see his movies, and I'm also including something for example like Raiders of the Lost Ark, I am taken back to the feeling that I had when I would read pulp science fiction serials in magazines like Trilling Wonder Stories, Starling Stories, and so forth.
And stuff by Haggard and Burroughs and people like that. He remembers that sense of wonder.
And he also remembers what it was like to be a kid. I think it's interesting that so many of his films have as their locale the American suburbs.
And he grew up in a suburb and you see that suburb in Poltergeist in particular and in ET.
The monetary success of ET and Poltergeist makes us wonder about the quality of science fiction movies in general.
We ask Ebert if it were possible for the quality of a science fiction movie to be as high as that of the great all time movie classics.
Certainly. The British film magazine, Sight and Sound, takes a poll of the world's film critics every ten years to see what are the greatest films of all time.
They've done it in 52, 62, 72 and they're in the process of doing it again now.
And I fully anticipate that when the tallies are added up, 2001 will be included among the ten greatest films ever made.
We'll have some more with Roger Ebert next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and Daryl Lane.
Among the science fiction movies that came out in the summer of 1982 were Blade Runner and The Thing.
Neither movie was as successful as its makers anticipated, though part of the reason for that would have to be the science fiction competition during the summer.
Blockbusters like E.T., Poltergeist and Tron.
Blade Runner was a beautifully produced movie about the near future, during a time when artificial humans or androids can be created.
We asked Roger Ebert, film critic of the Chicago Sun-Times and co-host of the television show At the Movies, if there was any particular reason for the failure of Blade Runner to make a larger splash.
I think the reason for that is that the director never really got interested in the people or androids in his plot.
And the movie was a triumph of set design. It looked great. It was a very interesting looking vision of the future.
And in particular the notion that in so many movies or books, at least in, you know, we're not talking about maybe people who are really familiar with the whole field of science fiction,
but to the general public, the science fiction future is this wonderful stainless steel and four-mic place with towers and rockets jetting around and everybody dressed like a hospital intern and so forth.
And this movie had the imagination to suggest that 40 years from now things are going to be 40 years older. The pollution is going to be 40 years worse.
Poverty is going to be 40 years more deeply ingrained. Crime will be 40 years more ubiquitous and so forth. That was a very interesting vision.
I do feel, though, that the really interesting thing about Blade Runner and probably about the Philip K. Dick material that it started from was centered around the question of what is human, you know.
If the memories that I have are not of a life that I live, does that make them any less my memories?
And Harrison Ford, when I interviewed him, said much the same thing, that that's what attracted him to the material.
The dilemma of which of these people were human and which of these people were not is, as far as their minds were concerned, they all had the same kind of background to call on.
I think that that theme kind of got lost in the middle of those great special effects.
And if the movie had really been willing to follow through on the value questions that it raised, it might have been a more interesting movie.
Now the irony is that I think that one of the reasons it wasn't as successful as it might have been is because it didn't follow through on those questions.
And yet from what I understand, that material was cut out of the movie because they figured it wouldn't be box office. It's better just to have the special effects.
The Thing was the second Hollywood production of John W. Campbell's classic short story, Who Goes There?
It was done by John Carpenter, who specializes in horror movies, his best being Halloween.
We asked Ebert about his views on the movie.
Well, it really had an interesting monster, but it didn't really have people.
Yet I didn't really feel much concerned about the characters in the thing.
And another thing that bothered me, you know, years ago in science fiction fandom, they had the so-called idiot plot.
The plot that can only last as long as the movie because everyone in the movie is an idiot.
Because if somebody wasn't an idiot, they would figure out what to do and do it.
And in The Thing, the characters have an annoying persistent tendency to not do what everyone in the audience knows they should be doing.
You know, they split up. They go outside. They say, you stay right here because I know I can take care of myself.
They trust each other. They do not keep a sense of who was where, when, and why.
In a group of people like that with military discipline, the moment that they figured out what they were up against,
if they had instilled watertight discipline upon themselves, they would have been a lot better off.
But the movie depends upon everybody being an idiot.
Next time, we'll continue our talk with film critic and science fiction fan Roger Ebert.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The film is a production of the film by the director of the film, Roger Ebert.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David B.
Horror and fantasy are two movie categories that are closely related to science fiction, and they've both been very popular in the last year or so.
And the popularity of both of them, as with science fiction, reflects something found in our present society.
We spoke recently with Roger Ebert, film critic and science fiction fan, about the popularity of the field.
We asked him if the Science Fiction Movie Boom reflects our concern with the space program and our desire to get off the earth before we ruin or destroy it.
No, I don't think so. I think maybe some of the fascination with 2001 might have been because it came out at a time when amazing things were happening in space and we were getting ready to land on the moon and so forth.
But I believe that the space movies today, like Star Wars and The Empire Strikes Back, are identified with primarily in the same way that Rage of the Lost Ark is, as a pick-a-resk adventure.
And when we talk about science fiction, I gather that you and I both kind of tacitly did not include horror films.
I think a psychiatrist might say something like this, or at least I've heard this theory.
It's not so much that the space films indicate our feeling that there's a new frontier to be conquered, as that the monster films indicate our fear of technology.
And there is an old theory that at any time when mankind, in recent years, in the 20th century, when people, when the public has started to feel threatened by the bomb or by technology,
then you get a lot of horror pictures because the message seems to be science will get out of control. Science will kill us.
There'll be some kind of a virus or giant grasshoppers or something will happen.
And scanners or other terrible things will be unleashed upon the population.
Ebert dislikes one particular aspect of current horror movies.
I'll tell you one thing that's happening. I'm getting awfully bored by special effects makeup.
It's only been about 18 months since the big breakthroughs of American werewolf in London and so forth.
And already you get the close up of the face and the jaw begins to pulsate and then the face begins to expand and there's a face inside trying to get out.
I've seen it now. I've seen it so many times that it's boring. I want to get out with a story.
The World of the Dead
Fantasy, as distinguished from science fiction, is also currently popular with movies like The Sword and the Sorcerer, Beastsmaster, The Cat People and Dragonslayer.
We asked Ebert if the quality of fantasy could equal that of current science fiction.
Well, the problem with fantasy is that science fiction is allegedly plausible.
Although we could have a lot of questions about how much, for example, of Star Wars is really plausible.
Fantasy is not supposed to be plausible, but the problem is most fantasy movies seem to be limited to sword and sorcery types of Conan the Barbarian,
the Sword and the Sorcerer, and movies like that.
Or you get an animated film like Lord of the Rings.
I have not seen very much of the kind of fantasy, for example, the fantasy and science fiction magazine helped to popularize.
Fantasy in that it has to do with the whimsy of magic or impossible things intruding into real life.
Those kinds of movies are hard to do and it takes a lot of nerve to do them.
It's one thing to have some broad falling out of her leopard skin bikini and some big brood with a sword and the rippling pectorals and so forth.
But it's another thing to have the imagination to really create a fantasy.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Cruz.
In the late 1930s, science fiction was in transition.
In one sense it was becoming more sophisticated, outgrowing its early emphasis on space opera.
Jack Williamson, who wrote Space Opera, considers this change natural.
I was growing up and the readers were growing up.
That's something that's been going on in science fiction, at least in American science fiction all along.
I think you can draw a distinction between, let's say, European or mainstream science fiction on the one hand,
which has always been recognized and treated as literature and part of American science fiction,
which was looked down on.
But as the readers of that grew older, some of them started writing, some of them started editing magazines,
most of them outgrew science fiction, but some of them didn't, so there was a continual increase in the education, the sophistication, and so forth, the whole field.
Among these readers of pulp science fiction were a few who developed into those authors whose work defined what science fiction would become in later years.
These early readers were people like Isaac Asimov, Robert Heinlein, A. E. Van Vogt, Theodore Sturgeon, L. Sprague de Kamp, Frederick Poel, and Hal Clement.
And these authors are now the classics, those who wrote in that very special period of science fiction called the Golden Age.
A. E. Van Vogt, looking back at that period, says that he read the authors who were starting out then with him, but that he had no idea they were doing anything special.
You know, I mean, we were just doing our thing, and everybody was evidently stimulated in a special way.
Frederick Poel belonged to a group of writers and fans in New York called the Futurians.
He remembers the closeness of the group and how they would help each other.
Well, science fiction has some special traits, and one of them is that its readers herd together as much as they can.
They form fan clubs and associations and correspond to groups and so on.
And in New York City, there were quite a few science fiction fans, and about 25 or 30 most of whom wanted to be writers formed a club called the Futurians.
There are people like Cyril Karnblast, Isaac Asimov, Damon Knight, and myself, quite a few others.
We did discuss each other's work a lot, and I guess in the process of criticizing it, there was a lot of help given.
I think the biggest factor that made it easier for a lot of us to go on with writing was just the knowledge that other people were doing it, and also the fact that we collaborated a lot.
We remedied each other's deficiencies by writing, I mean by collaborating on single stories, and although most of the stories were not very good, we did learn something by seeing how other people would tackle the same subjects we were writing about.
Elsprague de Camp also remembers this closeness among writers at the beginning of the Golden Age, but like VanVote, de Camp says that the authors had no sense of participating in anything special.
Well, I daresay that various ones of us did have their greens and fancies at times, and wondered how it was all going to come out, and would this become, would the genre expand and take over the mainstream and various things of that sort?
But as to that mostly, as I said, it was simply a matter of making a living.
But the living those young writers made is the foundation of today's science fiction.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you for watching.